It's a simple fact that to be at peace with others, we must be willing to forgive.
Please notice two examples.
A father and his teenage daughter didn't get along.
Minor disagreements often developed into shouting matches.
Finally, the tension got so bad that the daughter was asked to leave the house.
Eventually, she recognized that she was at fault and asked for her father's forgiveness.
Instead of overlooking her mistakes, her father rejected her efforts.
He was unwilling to extend forgiveness to his own daughter.
Now let's contrast that with another example.
A blameless man was condemned to die for a crime he didn't commit.
Shortly before he died, the innocent man stated,
Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing.
Those words of Jesus are recorded at Luke chapter 23 verse 34.
And he may have been referring to the Roman soldiers who drove the nails into his hands and feet
and who didn't know who he really was.
Or Jesus may have had in mind some in the crowd who demanded his execution
but would later exercise faith in him.
The point is that Jesus was willing to forgive freely.
How do we measure up with regard to forgiveness?
Are we like Jesus willing to forgive others freely?
Or at times do we tend to be more like the man who was unwilling to forgive?
Granting forgiveness isn't always easy.
Imperfection exerts a powerful influence over us, sometimes robbing us of compassion.
When someone hurts us, we may become resentful or hold a grudge.
And perhaps some of us were taught not to forgive others.
Little wonder that cultivating a peaceful forgiving spirit can be difficult.
Still, the Bible encourages us to forgive freely.
Let's consider another example of forgiveness in the man Job.
And we're familiar with his trials, loss of his possessions and ten children,
a loathsome disease, and his wife told him to curse God and die.
Three companions heard about Job's calamities and they agreed to go comfort him.
Job chapter 2 verse 13 states that when they arrived,
they sat with him for seven days and seven nights, but they didn't say a word to him.
Now maybe that was a good thing, because when they finally opened their mouths,
they deeply hurt Job with their baseless accusations.
But notice something interesting about this account.
Please turn with me to Job chapter 42.
At the end of Job's trials, Jehovah asked Job to do something regarding these false
accusers.
Notice Jehovah's words there, Job 42, the B portion of verse 8.
And my servant Job will pray for you.
I will surely accept his request not to deal with you according to your foolishness.
Did you notice?
After all the false accusations, Jehovah asked Job to pray for the men who had tormented him.
Now would Job tell Jehovah,
Jehovah, after what they said to me, I'm not going to forgive them.
Would Job be resentful?
Notice the latter portion of verse 9.
And Jehovah accepted Job's prayer.
Job followed Jehovah's instructions.
What was the result of Job's integrity and his forgiving spirit?
Verse 10.
After Job had prayed for his companions,
Jehovah removed Job's tribulation and restored his prosperity.
Jehovah gave him double what he had before.
The account was on to say that Job had 10 more children.
He lived for 140 more years and for 17 states.
Finally, Job died after a long and satisfying life.
Job was blessed for his forgiving spirit and he set a good example for us to forgive freely.
In the following dramatization with Celia and Haley,
notice why Haley finally decides to forgive freely.
I've been thinking of you.
How did you like the Neurological Sun?
Yes, I can't.
So it's one of those treats transform your lives.
I wish you could give her a rest.
Sorry?
Oh, nothing.
I'm sorry.
It's just Emily for the millionth time.
What's the problem, love?
There's no problem.
It's just difficult to let her back in.
Not that simple.
You want to forgive.
But I'll get burned again.
Keep in mind, a chance to forgive is a chance to imitate Jehovah.
We wouldn't want to miss that opportunity.
I never thought about it like that.
Think back to a time when you wanted forgiveness.
When it meant everything, how did it feel?
You feel awful.
That you've let everyone down.
They forgive you.
Suddenly everything's okay.
Emily, sorry, I haven't been back to you.
I've planned for tomorrow.
What good reasoning on the part of Celia?
Did you notice the expression that really touched Haley's heart?
A chance to forgive is a chance to imitate Jehovah.
We wouldn't want to miss that opportunity.
So when we've been wronged, we don't want to miss the opportunity
to imitate Jehovah by forgiving freely.
Please notice how this is highlighted at Colossians 3.13.
When we consider Job's example, remember that Jehovah instructed him
to pray for his companions.
And that helped Job display a forgiving spirit.
Well, notice here what Jehovah instructs us to do.
Colossians 3.13.
Continue putting up with one another
and forgiving one another freely,
even if anyone has a cause for a complaint against another.
Just as Jehovah freely forgave you,
you must also do the same.
The Greek verb used here for freely forgive
is related to a word often rendered undeserved kindness or favor.
When used in the sense of forgiving,
this verb conveys the idea of doing so freely, generously.
Just as when you, out of generosity, give a gift to someone.
Jehovah requires that we freely forgive others in imitation of him.
Did you notice the end of the verse?
You must also do the same.
Now, if the offense is minor, it's best to overlook it.
First Corinthians chapter 13 verse five states that,
love does not keep account of the injury.
And Proverbs 19 verse 11 tells us
that it is beauty to overlook an offense.
However, if we feel that we need to talk to our brother
or a sister about an offense that was committed against us,
what's the best way to handle that?
First, we should ask Jehovah in prayer for his guidance.
Then, with the brother's good qualities in mind,
graciously tell him that we want to make peace.
Listen carefully and empathetically.
We shouldn't interrupt,
even if we don't agree with everything being said.
It may be that his viewpoint is wrong,
but it is his viewpoint.
Then when it's our turn to speak, we want to be gracious.
Tell the brother what we appreciate about him.
Apologize for any part that we played in the misunderstanding.
If our humble efforts result in good, thank Jehovah.
If they don't, keep asking Jehovah for guidance
while we look for another opportunity to make peace.
When we truly forgive,
we make a heartfelt decision to let go of resentment
and what peace that can bring us.
Now forgiving doesn't mean that we approve of a wrong action,
consider it unimportant or pretend it didn't happen.
Also, if we've been treated unjustly
and have a cause for complaint,
we do what we can to pursue peace and resolve the matter,
and then we confidently leave it in Jehovah's hands.
Brothers and sisters, what will you take away
from this consideration?
I'm sure you'll agree that it can be a challenge
at times to forgive,
but rather than be like the man we spoke of earlier
who refused to forgive his own daughter,
may we follow the examples of Jehovah,
Jesus, Job, and Hailey by forgiving freely, generously.
Remember, a chance to forgive is a chance to imitate Jehovah
and we wouldn't want to miss that opportunity.
May all of us pursue peace by being willing to forgive freely.
For the Garret Loche, a member of the governing body
will now present the final talk of this symposium.
Seek peace and pursue it
by using our gift of speech wisely.